📑 Project Report

File Management App (Python)


---

1️⃣ Introduction

The File Management App is a Python-based program that enables users to manage files through a command-line interface. It demonstrates the use of file handling, user input, error handling, and modular programming with functions in Python.


---

2️⃣ Objectives

To design a basic yet practical file management system.

To practice Python file-handling techniques.

To implement exception handling for safe operations.

To understand modular programming using functions.



---

3️⃣ Methodology

The project is built using Python’s built-in functions and the os module. It follows the structured approach of modular programming, where each feature is wrapped inside a separate function.

Functions used:

Function Name	Purpose

create_file()	Creates a new file
view_all_files()	Lists all files in current directory
delete_file()	Deletes a file
read_file()	Displays file content
edit_file()	Adds content to an existing file
main()	Controls program flow



---

4️⃣ Technologies Used

Technology	Purpose

Python 3.x	Programming language
OS Module	Directory & file handling
File Handling Functions	read, write, append



---

5️⃣ Features & Working

▶ Create File

Uses open(filename, "x") to create a file.

If file exists, handles FileExistsError.


▶ View All Files

Uses os.listdir() to display files.


▶ Delete File

Uses os.remove(filename) to delete files.


▶ Read File

Opens file in read ("r") mode.

Displays file content using read().


▶ Edit File

Opens file in append ("a") mode.

Adds new text to the file.


▶ Exit

Terminates program loop.



---

6️⃣ Exception Handling

Used blocks like:

try:
    ...
except FileNotFoundError:
    ...
except FileExistsError:
    ...
except Exception as e:
    ...

This ensures that the program does not crash even if invalid inputs are given.


---

7️⃣ Output (Sample Run Screenshot Description)

When user enters "1", application asks for filename and creates it.

When "3", user can delete the file.

When "4", file content is displayed.



---

8️⃣ Conclusion

The File Management App successfully performs basic file operations and demonstrates strong understanding of Python concepts like file handling, loops, modular programming, and exception handling.

This project is useful for beginners and can be further extended into GUI-based apps using Tkinter or other frameworks.


---

9️⃣ Future Enhancements

🔹 Add a GUI using Tkinter
🔹 Add options to rename or copy files
🔹 Allow selecting custom folders
🔹 Build a desktop application